in late November word had already gotten
off of the mainland that there was a
virus in Wuhan six weeks later the trade
truce was signed with an out clause a
very clever out clause that said if
there was any kind of act of God
pandemic then they didn't have to make
good on what they had committed to buy
from the United States within days they
announced the first coronavirus the
World Health Organization should be held
accountable for not holding China
accountable to providing good valid data
so that the rest of the world could
prepare for fewer people to die to me
these are equivalents to acts of war on
the part of China what is a ripple
effect what happens to people what does
that go they're not working the same
hours maybe one of the two breadwinners
lost their job your 401k has been
decimated let me get this straight you
can constantly bail yourself out and you
can constantly go print money with this
quantitative easing why the hell do I
have to pay taxes the Federal Reserve
came riding to the rescue and said no no
go back to your spending ways borrow and
spend borrow and spend mortgaging
yourself up to the eyeballs how do we
give you if Donald J Trump is Steven
minuchin boss then Donald Trump is
running the Federal Reserve right now
that's not real money that's fake money
that's true and I'm sure you're not as a
fake money really how many laws are
being broken like I'm not an attorney
but I've lost count
the Socialists say that we can print as
much money as we want oh my gosh I mean
when does it ever end the Fed is both
arsonist and firefighter this is like we
need a drink like oh yeah you need
something stronger than anything let me
say that much 75 percent of Americans
have seen their income cut by at least
25 percent these are the seeds of social
unrest
did you ever think you would make it I
feel like it takes sweet victory I know
this life meant for me here yeah why
would you bet on July it but we got
plenty now you came in given values
contagious this world of entrepreneurs
we can't evaluate a haters happy run
homie look what I become I'm the one
[Music]
so very tenders a lot of you guys have
been talking about this whole
coronavirus you know path what should we
be looking out for how can we be
prepared for it and many of you have
been talking about it from the economy
standpoint so we decided to bring in
economists to kind of see what the
effects are going to be and the person I
brought in today is a special one
because she got her MBA from the
University of Texas at Austin got her
MSN journalism from Columbia University
she was the adviser to Richard Fisher
who was a former CEO of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas for nine years
and then she's been featured on Wall
Street Journal Bloomberg CNBC you name
it and she wrote a book I think 2017
that was published fed up and with that
being said my guest today Danielle
DiMartino booth Daniel thank you for
coming out and being a guest it's great
to be here so so when we get into this a
couple things I've seen your stuff with
your book I've seen your interviews I've
seen a lot of the talks you've given you
can go extremely technical and speak the
language of folks who are in that world
and then you can also go simple sure
today let's try to speak to the audience
of middle to simple to get a lot of us
educated on what's going on obviously
some of the people that aren't here over
experts in this area but most of us want
to learn a little bit more on what you
know so having said that we've not seen
a time like this in a long time what is
your biggest concern today when you see
all this stuff going on well so my
mother grew up in South Texas with her
grandparents who survived the Great
Depression so she's one of the few
Americans left who remember what it
means to save before you spend it is not
part of the American culture anymore but
nor in more than a hundred years have we
needed to be of this mindset or so at
least we thought there's always been
access to credit there's always been a
mortgage there has always been a car
loan there's always been a credit card
if you're kind of running straight down
the middle but I think what the
coronavirus is going to revive is kind
of our founding fathers their philosophy
you know if you don't plan ahead then
you'll fail to be if you don't prepare
then
you feel to be prepared this is Ben
Franklin I'm paraphrasing him but what
we're finding out with this economic
shock of the coronavirus is that so few
Americans are prepared so few Americans
have a rainy day fund set aside in order
to weather them one or two or three
months and that's problematic and it
gives me great hope at the same time
because I think we're going to return to
some of our more frugal roots in this
country which has vast implications for
the US economy how do we get here though
I mean you know obviously you know the
the coronavirus is a form some call it
white swan' some call a Black Swan
because we have experienced some kind of
a pandemic before so we can't
necessarily call it a black smile like a
911 maybe it was a Black Swan but how do
we get to this point where our habits
are so much leaning towards debt and
constabie and that how do we get to this
point well I think it's it's been
something that has been encouraged by
Federal Reserve policy and by
politicians in America for generations
plural you know we came out of the 1980s
after the stock market crash which was
really just kind of a blip in a longer
economic cycle but we came out of that
with most of our leaders saying borrow
and spend borrow and spend things really
got cranked up kind of in the 80s with
the yuppies and the baby boomer
generation coming out and spending more
than they earned you know they were the
first generation to take on as much debt
as they did and we kind of saw this
hockey stick of increase in credit card
debt for the first time that was
accepted across the country and you know
towards the end of the dot-com era I
mean we it's hard to even think back to
1999-2000 when everybody was trading
stocks and insider trading excuse me
day trading and you couldn't go in a
taxicab in New York without the taxi
drivers saying this is I got a hot stock
tip boy and you have a hot stock tip for
me that kind of imploded and Alan
Greenspan to resolve this took interest
rates to our
officialy low levels and kept them there
for a long time at the same time you had
financial innovation as are the words
that they use and all that means is
opening up the debt box to where you
know what were we saying at the height
of the last housing boom if you can fog
a mirror you can get a mortgage
there were people's dogs who were
getting you know the credit card
applications in the mail
I remember late on in the credit boom I
had a six-month-old son my firstborn
received a credit card application in
the mail its six-month this one got
excited a card application has a mail in
the mail and that was kind of the apex
of people using their homes as ATMs this
was this was you know what Jane and
Johnny and Maria they can all go to
whatever college they want to go to
because I'll just take the money out of
the house to send them we can go take
the Disney vacation we can't afford I'll
take the money out of my house and send
him so the mortgage bubble kind of took
debt in America to a whole new level and
then that imploded and we find ourselves
over a decade later and now in the
current iteration in the current cycle
we've bought more car than we can afford
to drive buying a $60,000 pickup you
don't blink an eye because maybe it's a
7 or an 8 year loan term and as
Americans I think we've kind of lost our
way because we don't look at what we
earn compared to what we can afford we
look at whether we can make the payment
and just get by and that type of mindset
is what has left an entire the largest
economy in the world as vulnerable as it
is as this Black Swan whites won't call
it what you want but that's what's left
us so vulnerable is that we've just done
what we need to do to just get by
paycheck to paycheck to paycheck and not
set aside anything and now we find
ourselves with record mortgage
forbearance and people walking away from
this and that debt because they have
absolutely no choice how do we get here
on this sense of when I'm when I'm
asking this next question because it's
the same thing as before how do we get
here in the sense
is this our fault of people's faults or
is this the decision-makers fault on
making it looks kind of like the
following you know you are living in a
family and your dad lowers the standards
and it lets you do whatever you want to
do your parents let you kind of do
whatever they want to do and then a kid
goes out and says you know what I'm
gonna go try to smoke weed and this
other girl she introduced me to this
drug and I'm gonna go out there and
party state till two o'clock in the
morning you're sixteen years of coz no
one cares
but is it our fault or is it the
decision-makers fault that we got here
I think placing blame is is
short-sighted because I think the blame
has to go around I think that
policymakers and the reason I wrote
fed-up in the first place is that at the
highest level especially if you're
economically vulnerable or if you're not
you don't know everything that there is
to know about finance it's not as if
they teach it in high schools much less
colleges as a requirement so Americans
aren't financially illiterate by the
design of our educational system so you
get the politicians and you get the
heads of the Federal Reserve and they
encourage this
so you're saying well that's a leader
and the leader is telling me how I
should run my budget and so they must be
right Ben Bernanke you know at the
height of the housing bubble was saying
that that there's no way that home
prices decrease on on a nationwide basis
well that's not true it did happen
during the Great Depression but you're
being told by people who sound really
smart that you're making the right
decision and at the same time though you
have to go back and say hey you know
you're living from paycheck to paycheck
you realize it you know if you're not
setting any money aside for a rainy day
you know if you're sitting in the in a
car dealership and you're being
sweet-talked by the finance manager you
know that it might not be six hundred
dollars a month that you can really
afford it might be more like four
hundred and fifty dollars a month and
you tell yourself but they're gonna let
me do it and so I will so I think you
have to say that it was encouraged at
the highest levels and shame on them but
by the same token I think households
have deluded themselves for a while as
well because we've become an instant
gratification Society
that's a multi-generational statement by
the way I mean you've got an entire
generation of baby boomers living in way
more house than they need right now
their children may need it and maybe
moving back in with them but I'm not
trying to pin this on the Millennials
per se who are experience and spend all
of their their disposable income on
great vacations and the latest iPhones
now I think this carries across multiple
generations and I think that Millennials
learned a lot from their parents who
also lived beyond their means
so generationally so you're not saying
this is a government thing this is not
us because you know how you travel and
you go places I always travel when I go
places I asked the driver so tell me
about your house what's a house go for
here this much how much you financed
your house what do you mean how much is
your finance you know how much you
finance your house I didn't finance my
house you're at the Caribbeans what do
mean you didn't finance your house you
can't find any stuff here what does that
mean you can't find our stuff here if
you buy a house you have to buy it cash
yep what do you mean you have to buy
cash so if you don't have yeah like my
house right here fifty fifty thousand
dollars my wife's parents and my parents
helped us and we bought this house so
you don't have any payment on it we
don't have any payment on it right so
that that's very normal for a lot of
people in different countries that's
right we're in the u.s. it's kind of
like well you know I can buy that house
and finance that ninety-five percent or
ninety percent over back in the days
mean a hundred percent you know and my
payments only going to be two thousand
dollars a month and I'm financing a
$250,000 house that that part to me is
if we allow that to be the norm well the
people are gonna take advantage of it
okay
so you know the chicken and the egg
story I'm curious to know who started
this standard because there has to be
somebody held accountable to this year
yeah I run a company if in our company a
mistake happens or we take a hit all the
you know points-- you know everything's
gonna be pointed at me like I say well
he's the CEO what you do how come you to
make the right decision right how come
you didn't go raise more money out of
town well you know for crisis was gonna
happen that we could maintain our status
and all this other stuff fair enough on
the seal someone has to be held liable
for the
yep you're an economist you're an expert
I know I read your stuff you try to be
as diplomatic as possible because you're
trying to respect your peers and the
industry you're part of who started this
I'm trying to figure out who is liable
for starting this mess so you know it I
would say that it goes back to a
democratic or a Republican
administration but the truth is when the
Community Reinvestment Act was was came
about first of all let's go back a
little bit further we're in Texas the
Savings and Loan scandal happened here
in the aftermath of this great crisis
where Texas was the epicenter you had
homes clear at fire sale prices so you
had mass foreclosures and but you also
had people come in who were going to
live in the homes and buy them on the
cheap and then the market cleared and it
was ugly and it was messy but the market
cleared contrast that with politicians
really enjoying saying that owning a
home is the American dream and you can
cross that from Clinton to Bush all the
way on through Obama but the thing is
they were telling Americans that owning
a home was the American dream what they
were really saying was more to
mortgaging yourself up to the eyeballs
with the assistance of a federal agency
then you get to feel wealthy you're not
actually wealthy you've actually become
an indentured servant to this great big
mortgage market which is the largest
debt market on planet Earth larger than
the US Treasury market I mean it's it's
multiples of the size of the US Treasury
market and politicians found out that
people enjoyed feeling wealthy even if
they weren't and again we were not a
country founded on the ideals of debt
equals prosperity no no you save you
invest you prosper and having Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac and the FHA extend
extend extend increased eligibility for
mortgages I mean when my when the
Vietnam War ended in San Antonio Texas
you know my parents borrowed money
from the parents and with the help of a
VA loan they barely got a mortgage and
it was known for their generation that
they were supposed to strive to pay that
mortgage off before they retired you
certainly don't go into retirement with
mortgage debt and yet here we are in
America today and the majority of
retirees still carry mortgage debt think
about that you're in retirement and
financially vulnerable I know it makes
it but it is what it is and it's the
culture that we have accepted and we've
been told by our leaders that it's the
way it should be who's questioning them
oh I think right now mother nature is
questioning them I think right now the
coronavirus is questioning them I think
that there is going to be a severe
cultural backlash where families feel
the pain enough to say and make
decisions on their own if they're
encouraged to take on debt sure we're
going to go back to our ways in a in
some sense of the word but there are
predictions right now that unemployment
could surpass that of what we saw during
the Great Depression I mean these are
unfathomable numbers that we're
considering in America during at the
apex at the height of the Great
Depression one in four Americans were
out of work in two weeks time two weeks
time we had 9.95 nearly 10 million
jobless claims in America in two weeks
time we got to one in 16 Americans and
what we know from studying Google Trends
you can you can track any word on Google
Trends right now if you track
unemployment insurance it's really
popular especially in Texas and in New
York and in other states where there's
been a tremendous backlog Florida is
going to be coming up big-time because
they have such an antiquated
unemployment insurance system that
people can't get through to file the
unemployment insurance claims that they
need to right now but what we know from
studying Google Trends is that the third
wave was even bigger than the first and
the second waves as other states went in
to shut down
so we haven't seen the worst of what
we're going to see in terms of the ranks
of Americans who are unemployed they
took a survey just overnight 75% of
Americans have seen their income cut by
at least 25% in other words even people
who are keeping their jobs aren't making
the same amount sure they're not working
the same hours maybe one of the two
breadwinners lost their lost their job
you've got your kids at home online
schooling and you're trying to do your
job even if you are working remotely you
may as well be on your roof trying to
get your job done and inform a sentence
I'm a writer I mean I write and conduct
research and it's things work out really
well for me around 4:00 or 5:00 a.m.
when the whole house is asleep but this
is this is a cultural shift is what I'm
trying to say this is unlike anything
generations have seen since those who
survived the Great Depression so mother
nature is holding these people
accountable with coronavirus a cake or a
virus which and I'm not saying it's
revenge or anything about nature I'm
just saying it's it's shining a very
bright light I totally get it it's kind
of it's it's a it's highlighting a lot
of the things that they've been doing
that we haven't been prepared for and
now hey you're being held accountable
what are we gonna do now I get that part
when we read you know the articles that
say unemployment is projected by the end
of second quarter to be at 30% and just
kind of you read it you're like yeah
it's gonna be at 30% you know you know
you're looking at the news it's gonna be
at 30%
it's gonna be at 30% let me skip the
channel then I'm gonna go to this next
one 30% is 30% what what does that
really mean if you were to unpack so and
here's what I mean by unpack 30% if we
were to unpack 30% consequences so
ripple effect if we go to 30% 75% is
minus 25% of income right now
of Americans one out of four was
unemployed back in a great depression
30% means one in three point three so
we're gonna go into some tough times
what is a ripple effects and what
industries what happens to people
economy safety what does that go what
could I look like so you're asking the
key question here
because for as large as the fiscal
stimulus is and we've already got two
trillion out there the Federal Reserve's
going to lever up by a multiple of ten
four hundred and fifty billion dollars
so that they can keep a lot of
businesses still in business some of
which may or may not deserve to go out
of business but we'll get to that but
the fact is from what we know today the
stimulus checks aren't going to hit
until when a lot of Americans have been
out of work for six weeks or more the
time the actual stimulus money hits
their accounts six weeks well it was
three weeks from the time of the signing
of when Congress passed the legislation
and it was signed into law and by then
there were plenty of Americans who had
been in shutdown for two or three weeks
so there have been a lot of people who
have been trying to get by on god knows
what that's why you've seen wealthy
Restaurant tours in major cities open
their restaurants back up on their own
dime to feed people who don't have food
we're talking about red lines that you
read about in history class in middle
school people who don't have food and
let's let's stick with restaurants for
just a second the the percentage of
restaurants that are never going to
return never is tremendous what do you
mean by that never going to return never
going to reopen never going to be able
to find the financing your average
restaurant has two or three days of cash
flow on hand a great restaurant maybe
has one or two weeks of cash flow on
hand but they've been asked by the
government to keep all of their
employees employed and wait for the
Small Business Administration loans to
come through and float them through to
the end of September a lot of business
people in America did the math and said
this isn't going to work and I can't
tell you that the demand is going to be
there at the end of the second quarter
best-case scenario I don't I you can't
tell me that as many Americans are going
to go out and spend the way they used to
you can't tell me that as many Americans
are going to go to concerts go
the movies go to sporting events go to
music festivals get on planes you know
something of this magnitude I mean
there's a headline that hit today there
are more New Yorkers who have died as a
as a as a consequence of the corona
virus then what then what died on 9/11
you know I was I was in New York at the
time I worked on Wall Street at the time
it's something that reshaped my life and
the way I viewed the world now magnify
that spread that across a nation we're
gonna change the way we spend and if we
change the way we spend we're not going
to need to tap into as many services as
we once did as a nation so what I'm
trying to say is let's say we get to 30%
unemployment and let's say the worst of
the virus has passed that doesn't mean
the economy is going to heal overnight
it might take years and that's what
people are not factoring in because if
you have something of such magnitude
that it changes the way you view the
world and it changes the way you view
spending 2019 was an extraordinary year
in American history business investment
had clamped down appreciably we had a
trade war going on in the background
there was a global economic slowdown
China in the United States weren't there
weren't Chinese people coming in and
buying us home so so there were a lot of
things that didn't occur in 2019 to
offset it was the American consumer was
the US household consumption is
typically two-thirds of the US economy
that's the way it's been year in and
year out for a very long time in 2019
consumption was 90 percent of the US
economy as the Federal Reserve did
everything they could to elevate the
stock market keep risky asset prices up
keep people feeling wealthy because they
look at their 401ks and spend and spend
and spend and spend beyond their means
ninety percent of US gross domestic
product in
19 was consumption I can't tell you when
we're going to get back to a normal
world of two-thirds of the US economy
being consumption because of these
massive shock that this is placing on US
households and the way that they're
going to perceive money going forward is
going to be a tremendous change
so you're saying even after this we go
back to business as usual
the recovery is not going to be
immediate because you have two camps
right now right one camp is saying the
moment this thing clears it up we're
gonna have the economy's going to go
back to $30,000 gonna hit 30th ow
everything's gonna go back to you know
business as usual people gonna go back
out and they're gonna do what they're
doing you're saying no it's gonna take a
while for us to recover from this your
argument on it taking a while for to go
back to recovering from this is it based
on the fear people now have that's gonna
take a while to recover from still the
concerns are being around too much
traffic we're not gonna go back in the
habit of going to sporting events games
are you saying the habits and the fears
of people's gonna take us to go back to
business as usual are you saying more
the financial decisions we're making
right now of these businesses going out
of business going to take us to recover
which part are you kind of saying
there's a more mindset or is there more
business well you you've described waves
one and waves two there's going to be an
initial reticence and fear among people
in terms of being in in densely
populated events where whatever they may
be
so that's your initial fear factor but
what I'm speaking of is what comes
behind this is a realization on the part
of your average working American that
they need to save more in the future
that they will never again wake up and
say why am i feeding my family ramen why
didn't I think to why didn't I set money
aside in my last life is that a good
thing oh I think it's eventually going
to be a great thing but it is going to
mean that there's that the coming
recession the recession that we already
know that we're in is going to be more
protracted and drawn
out than what many are right now
assuming as a base case this could
almost be like a filtering process to
take us back to the habits that work you
know it's are you saying almost two you
know how you talk to the generation that
came from the depression they're always
a little bit paranoid they're always a
little bit more worried there are always
a little bit more like cautious you know
when you talk to people older they're
always a little bit more paranoid
because they've experienced a lot more
things are you saying that this
generation may pick up a little bit of
the habit and a mindset of the Great
Depression generation of being more
paranoid than before because if that's
the case I actually don't think that's a
bad thing
I don't think it's a bad thing and I
think that it's long overdue in this
country but it's going to change the way
the economy operates on a fundamental
level you're going to perceive if you
right now are stretching your dollar to
fill up your grocery cart when this is
all said and done even if your income
goes back to what it was before hmm you
might not be saying I want the high rise
at Disney in the full package for the
family you might get in the car and
drive somewhere and go camping if you're
at the store you might not say you know
what I'm going to buy that lovely pork
tenderloin you might buy the pork chops
you might be more frugal in the way you
approach everyday purchases because you
were forced into being frugal because of
this because you were forced to
overnight make a budget and live within
it how different is that then oh wait
because even in oh wait if you remember
guys were buying condos in Vegas for
$700,000 $1,000,000 you know just put
another one I'll buy another one I'll
buy another one and everybody had an S
500 everybody had a nice car Porsche
Ferrari danwon all wait help market tank
39% were like I'll never do this again
so we kind of went back to good habits
for two or three years and then we went
back to our back bad habits again how
different is this from that the
difference is that the government then
was able to come in with many programs
and mortgage modifications don't go
around there were ten million
foreclosures in the United States it was
a tremendous hit but there were still
many mitigation
programs at the time and the Federal
Reserve had actual traditional tools the
Federal Reserve was able to take
interest rates from four-and-a-half
percent down to the zero bound they were
able to inject stimulus into the economy
whereas today they're starting at the
zero bound the country had never known
what a printing press was the country
had never known what it was for the Fed
to try and inflate financial markets
which they successfully did they were
able to come in and keep zombie
companies alive that otherwise would
have gone out of business in a regular
business cycle we did have our wrist
slapped but the Federal Reserve came
riding to the rescue and said no no
we're here we're here to back you go
back to your spending ways maybe you
can't get that mortgage you wanted but
by golly we're gonna take interest rates
down to the zero bound we're gonna have
private equity investors come swarm into
neighborhoods buy up homes that
otherwise would have gone to millennial
first-time homebuyers for fire sale
prices that didn't happen you had
investors swarm in because anybody that
had deep pockets could borrow more with
interest rates at 0% you had the
government borrowed a kingdom come so
you had a very quiet expansion of the
social safety net so you ended up
keeping a large percentage of the US
economy of the u.s. workforce excuse me
on the sidelines years later we ended up
with eight with a skills debt with a
lack of skills in the US workforce but
part of that was also because so many
Americans were able to stay out of the
workforce and even access credit all I'm
saying is we have companies that are
still in business today because the junk
bond market opened wide back open we
have a lot of the rot from the last
financial crisis that we were able to
basically refinance if you want to think
about it that way kick the can down the
road not eliminate or clean up just
refunding not eliminate not clean up
keep the overcapacity in the system keep
more people employed than the otherwise
would have been throughout the crisis
but you don't come out better and
stronger for it
you just feel like you have because
you've taken on that much more debt so
that leads to a lot of different
questions we're gonna go to negative
interest rates because if you're gonna
form four and a half to zero you know
where you're gonna go from zero to what
that also brings me to quantitative
easing which we'll touch about here in a
minute and obviously the Fed which will
get to a hundred percent but before we
get there you know I have a complete
different thing that I was curious what
you would say so pre coronavirus take
coronavirus off the table right I'm at a
Goldman Sachs event where the chief
investment officer speak in and she's
eloquently given a message of how they
foresee the economy being and here's
what's gonna happen we're not too
concerned about the coronavirus this was
at the beginning stages second week of
January to give them a credit it wasn't
like it was a second week of February
second week of January we're not really
thinking this is going to get out of
control the peanut you know the are not
score is not that high we're it's not
gonna spread but take coronavirus out go
to 2019 were in July okay us-china trade
war still going on and that's what I
still gonna go a little later in
December Saudi Arabia and Russia is
going on you know we have a wall go now
we have election going on we have the
divisive nests and Democrats going on we
have a hundred and twenty nine months of
economic expansion going on the greatest
ever we've never had 120 nine-month
economic expansion
so if coronavirus doesn't happen set
that aside we don't have anything that
comes out of one we're good to go there
is no coronavirus today are we going to
get to where we are today regardless of
coronavirus or did coronavirus have to
happen for us to be in shambles that we
are today with the 2.2 trillion dollar
stimulus and they're projecting another
ten trillion dollars that's gonna come
out possibly in the next month or two so
what's the difference so I think the
difference is magnitude and speed we
knew by looking at the data that things
were getting very very stretched and we
saw that if you took out fleet sales for
example I'll just take one example car
sales if you took out what the car
rental agencies and what corporate
corporations were buying for their own
fleets
if you took that out you saw four years
in a row of declining retail car sales
in America if you looked at the
employment sector we got our last clean
read free coronavirus this morning of
job openings we were seeing weakening on
every front of the job market prior to
the groan of IRAs hitting this was a
very slow moving slowdown but it was
definitely a slowdown if we looked at
data out of Germany if we looked at data
out of China which pre coronavirus was
was growing at a 30-year low Germany was
slowing as well so and this is again
this is all pre coronavirus so would the
Federal Reserve have been able to float
the financial markets through the
election because they were so
aggressively keeping interest rates and
artificially low levels and they were so
aggressively growing their balance sheet
even though they were calling it not QE
could they have floated the US economy
through the u.s. election possibly
possibly but we knew those of us who
worried about these things
knew that the bubble was getting to be
so big in the corporate debt market and
the bubble was getting to be so big in
the stock market that the littlest thing
and I've been saying this for probably a
year now that we are one financial shock
shy of the Federal Reserve having to
come in guns blazing and give a whole
new meaning one of my clients said the
Federal Reserve didn't come in with a
bazooka they came in with a neutron bomb
I agree but that was what was required
because when you try and buy time and
time as the factor of time gets more
expensive that's what happens you
inflate bigger bubbles and we walked
into this huge coronavirus event more
indebted as a world and more indebted as
a country more indebted as a
sector 74% of u.s. GDP almost 16
trillion dollars corporate debt
non-financial corporate debt in America
never seen these levels consumer debt
higher than it's ever been
remember what we talked about earlier if
you're joke you homeowner and the
mortgage company says no more no mas you
may not take equity out of your home
cash out refinancings are over and yet
as a society we're still told we better
get that four-year degree so now we have
1.6 trillion dollars of student debt on
our hands because something had to pay
for it so student debts paid for it and
now we've seen credit card debt get back
up to over a trillion dollars and now
we've seen car loans get back up to well
over a trillion dollars so yes we don't
have the same amount of mortgage debt in
America as we did in 2006-2007 but boy
we've met up for it big-time
in other areas so whether you're talking
about the world over 250 trillion
dollars of debt the US government
corporate America or US households we've
all been up to our eyeballs and drowning
in debt again that led to 15 questions
but let me ask one of them just out of
curiosity the world has 250 trillion
dollars of debt which is a lot of it is
credit but we only have around 50
trillion dollars of currency how is that
possible you know what I'm asking right
we have 50 trillion dollars of coins and
currency we have a quarter of trillion
dollars that 250 trillion dollars of
debt we have a lot of good faith based
on the the prowess of the US printing
press I mean the United States maintains
reserve currency status
that's very money though that's not real
money that's fake money that's to ensure
you know those are fake money oh really
I know but it's all based on faith how
long is this - how long is it
sustainable though how to go at that
pace in theory and if you listen to what
you're being told everything's going to
be ok
trillions and trillions and trillions of
dollars with the United States and the
lead the United States by far visa vie
any other countries taking on more debt
to address the coronavirus that
anybody else on the planet including
China that's saying something and we're
being told that it's all going to be
fine because you can just have the
Federal Reserve which is what they're
going to do this year finance all debt
that's being taken on put all of it on
their balance sheet we came into this
with the Federal Reserve's balance sheet
some are in the neighborhood of four
trillion it is likely that we will get
into double digits and trillion dollar
that's a scary thought
you know I'm looking at all this stuff
and to me everything the leaders
bulletin and I think someone's going to
come out the winner here from
coronavirus I do think oh this is
showing us that we need a strong leader
oh I think behind closed doors there is
and I'm going to go to an empire that
I'm looking at that it's gonna be crazy
for me to give them credit but
strategically I think they have been
poised for this to come up so here's
some data here China's national debt is
five point two trillion dollars that's
what they have right and their GDP at
their debt to GDP but before I get into
this how much do you as an economist
look at the debt to GDP ratio is that a
big factor do you look at that as a big
factor or not really it's not a big
concern I think it's a huge concern it
is so yeah and now that we know that
it's truly Milton Friedman behind me I
always adhered to his philosophy that
there is no such thing as a free lunch
you can buy time I mean God knows we've
seen a lot of time purchased bought but
we haven't seen it paid for so yes I
think that there will be ramifications
okay
so when you're saying that as an
economist you do look at nations and say
Japan's at 221 percent debt to GDP ratio
they're about to have a massive
recession taking place that's going to
take them a couple decades to recover do
you go to extreme measures when you see
numbers like that or it's not a measure
point that you look at and say that's a
very big factor well it really is a
country-by-country basis and I don't
want to I'm not trying to back out of a
question but internally in Japan they
own their own debt their fates not
necessarily tied to other countries
which means they're not beholding to the
kindness of strangers unlike the United
States where Japan owns a trillion
dollars of US Treasury debt China owns
over a trillion dollars of US Treasury
debt we assume that we can take on as
much debt as we
possibly can imagine in that our
borrowing costs will never go up because
we just assumed that we're number one it
too elaborate what you just said is that
is that in a sense of saying you know
we're married we have a family the bed
David family only borrows money from bed
David family okay that's Japan but us
the family here borrows money from
anybody strangers whoever as I can't is
that a good way of putting over Japan
versus us because we're borrow from
anybody and we also borrow from
ourselves and we the Treasury issues it
and the Federal Reserve buys it so then
if that's the case let me give you this
number and tell me what you think about
this China's in debt five point two
trillion Brazil's that two trillion
Japan's got nine trillion and if you
look at the debt to GDP ratio Japan's at
the top of 221 Greece 179 which could
pretty much know why Portugal 138 Italy
138 Belgium 115 u.s. 106 Spain 106 UK 86
France 98 point for Germany 62 you ready
for this number Russia 17% and they
bought 400 tons of gold the last couple
of years a lot of these nations that
have their gold have been sitting on the
same amount of gold for a while but
Russia has been coming up on the gold
leaders bulletin why are they at 17%
their debt by the way Russia's debt is
217 billion I don't have it written
anywhere here but many billions on your
page you're only after alien trillions
Russia is only a two hundred seventeen
point three billion dollars as of
February of 2020 I believe mm-hmm are
they looking at the saying we're gonna
make a vertical move in the next couple
years here because we're a little bit
more responsible than others or no that
doesn't mean anything
so people ask me all the time because if
you look at if you if you study the way
people think and I'm talking about
without naming any names the Socialists
say that we can print as much money as
we want that lets say that our debt
right now is twenty five trillion let's
round up given what we know we've just
spent as a nation but the Socialists the
the universal basic income say that you
can easily double it and because we have
a reserve currency status and because we
have not seen inflation in generations
we're going to get away with it in our
borrowing costs are never going to rise
and as long as our bar
cost never rise and inflation never
reared its ugly head then we can borrow
to kingdom come
and when these things work they work
until they don't work but at some point
if the rest of the world begins to push
back let's say certain countries emerge
stronger from this global recession than
others it tends to be if you're going to
make a move it tends to be he who has
dry powder the least amount of debt the
most hard assets is able to assume more
leverage and power than they otherwise
would based on looking at the size of
the country's economy in other words to
your point Russia has not weakened their
balance sheet they've strengthened it
and their long term planners China's a
long term planner as well China has a
ton of debt but China also has been a
lender to many nations with natural
resources throughout the world and
quietly been colonizing a big portion of
the world and they happen to have an
ally in Russia so you can connect many
dots no doubt about it theoretically no
doubt about it but all of this debt
we're taking on does weaken our position
on the global stage I think you're
saying theoretically because you're
being diplomatic but I think that's more
than theoretically by the way China's
number if you can verify this guy I just
want to verify this if I'm saying this
if I'm incorrect please let's correct it
I believe China's debt to GDP ratio is
50 point five percent which is also low
with Russia of all the names I said
they're low with Russia so it's
interesting how the place I will push
back a little bit though because if you
add up all of the different sources of
debt in China boy they're there 300 or
above 300 percent if you if you
corporate debt household debt and the
fact that there's a lot of state debt
that runs around in places that isn't
really identified if you did that with
us where would we be if we're right now
106 if you apply the corporate debt and
everything what would we probably in the
upper 200 so there's still higher than
us if you if you take everything on
voice yes okay
China is still higher than us if
considering all forms of death that's
good to know
so now 123 trillion dollars us collected
liabilities that we have how do we pay
that off I mean this whole thing about
debt that how do you pay off a hundred
and twenty three trillion all right I
don't think there's any kind of an
assumption about paying it off I think
there's there's an assumption about
carrying the debt how long is that gonna
be carried I mean it's hard to say look
this is you know there are there there
are so many the next generation of
constitutional lawyers is going to be
very busy states cannot declare
bankruptcy it is against the
Constitution of the United States for
the state of Illinois for example to
declare bankruptcy and we know from what
we've heard out of Illinois initially
that they're going to stop making some
payments that there's the potential for
the first time since the Great
Depression for a state to default on its
debt but the federal government is not
legally able to come in and bail out
Illinois theoretically they're breaking
a lot of laws in DC right now so I'm
sure that they would just pass a special
legislation of some kind and come in and
do it but that would be questioned
constitutionally what the Federal
Reserve is doing right now is also going
to be questioned constitutionally
because the Federal Reserve cannot buy
corporate bonds but by setting up a
separate vehicle through the Treasury
Department a special purpose vehicle
takes me back to my days of studying
Enron off-balance-sheet financing that's
what the government's doing right now
and by a seating control to the Treasury
the Federal Reserve has has lost its
independence if you want to take the
argument to an extreme if Donald J Trump
is Steven minuchin boss then Donald
Trump is running the Federal Reserve
right now and that's legal that's law
because there's four point five trillion
dollars that's going to be directed via
the Federal Reserve and the Treasury and
Donald Trump has said that he will not
answer to anybody even though he has
behaved and he's appointed an inspector
general from his administration but
there are things happening in America
right now and you used
it asked me about entitlement spending
and that's what brought public pensions
to mind so quickly and that's what
brought the state of Illinois to mind so
quickly there's an assumption that there
will never be a price to be paid but if
you think about what the average
American households about to go through
there are the makings of a third
political party in this nation to
question what is going on it's very easy
to see because right now there's a large
a large percentage of the US population
that has no voice this has been said for
a while though you really thinking we
can have a third because everybody's
been saying third political party third
political party and by the way it'd be a
great one but we've never had critical
mass but you aren't you and I are
talking about 30 percent of Americans
being out of work critical mass right
there you've never had the critical mass
but you've never had this many Americans
who are going to be focused on who is
and is not representing their best
interests how do you tell between the
I mean everybody can say they
have you as their best interest how do
you how do you tell that apart you know
because behind closed doors who's really
leading these guys that you said Trump
let me read something to you a tweet he
sent out back on September 11 the
Federal Reserve should get our interest
rates down to zero or less and we should
then start to refinance our that
interest could be brought way down while
at the same time substantially
lengthening the term we have the great
currency power and balance sheet and us
the US should always be paying the
lowest rate no inflation it is only the
naivete of Jay Powell and the Federal
Reserve that doesn't allow us to do what
other countries are already doing a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that we
are missing because of boneheads
this is 9/11 2019 this is pre
coronavirus to understand that we'll go
from four and a half to zero he did not
know that we're gonna need more for that
you read that you hear me say that what
do you think about it well he's using
the example of the country of Germany
that is effectively paid to take on
sovereign debt of course Germany is also
very frugal and their balance sheet
could stand up to ours and
but if you think about a bank let's
let's take this to its most simple terms
a bank is in business to borrow at a
very low rate and lend out money at a
much higher rate and the difference
between those two rates is where they
make money and why they're a bank why
they stay in business if you take
interest rates to a negative level a
bank has no reason to be a bank anymore
the bank should just close its front
doors and go away that's what you're
talking about if you're talking about
negative interest rates in America
that's how impossible it would be
that's how crippling it would be that's
why the Japanese bank stock index is
down 90 percent from its highs because
the Japanese banking system has been
crippled by negative interest rates
that's why the European banking system
that index since negative interest rates
were imposed is down 40% negative
interest rates are very much not
they're anti-american they're
unpatriotic they should never even be
considered and 2j pals credit and those
are not words that I use often he is
pushed back against negative interest
rates because he understands the
Pandora's Box that that would open with
all due deference to our president let
me ask you a question President Trump
obviously has never been a China fan and
not in last decade he's not going to
China fact he's tweeted about he's
talked about it certainly said China is
not a friend he's not an ally so we know
that right and I think we actually know
that yeah we know that well so the
question I want to ask is has he been a
fan of the Fed pre becoming a president
as somebody who's in real estate that's
how he's made as well okay is he a fan
of the fad or did he always have issues
with the Fed because I'm going somewhere
with this mm-hmm this is he been a pro
or you don't know if you don't know the
answer it's fine if you know no when he
was campaigning he was he was very open
and adamant about saying that the
Federal Reserve was inflating a stock
market bubble with artificially low
interest rates
that's what he said on the campaign
trail so that's a matter of public
record so let me ask you this question
is is there a possibility even a
possibility that he is wanting to do
whatever he can if it's even possible to
bankrupt the Fed the Reserve Federal
Reserve to bankrupt the Fed I mean you
can't you can't bankrupt the Fed you can
you can always bail the Fed out if your
Treasury I know you can but to get a two
point what we get is he trying to break
the that's what I'm saying to go to a
point where hey we learned our lesson
now we have to get away from it is there
any possibility that's the direction
he's going again the Federal Reserve
purchasing corporate bonds is in direct
violation of the Federal Reserve Act of
1913 that law has been thrown away with
the stimulus package because through a
special purpose vehicle the Federal
Reserve can through Blackrock a massive
firm by corporate debt and put it onto
Treasury's balance sheet if again you
take this argument to the extreme the
financial markets have been nationalized
and if you take the argument to the
extreme to the extent that the Treasury
is answerable to the administration
Donald Trump has broken the Fed and this
is something that is extremely difficult
to get your head around I need to get
out more
well I think we all need to get out more
we disagree on that right yes we're all
gonna be happy when we can get out more
but even before the coronavirus I needed
to get out more so I know what the
Federal Reserve Act says and when I was
inside the Fed for nine years in the
heat of the financial crisis it was
debated as to whether we could buy
corporate bonds and the answer was no
and yet somehow because this crisis is a
severe and Swift as it is we have said
we're going to set the law side look the
other way and find a workaround so that
we can make sure that we don't have a
full-blown meltdown in the corporate
debt market by the way that was
facilitated by Federal Reserve policy
keeping interest rates
too low for too long you would not have
had a doubling of us corporate bonds to
ten trillion dollars if the Fed had not
repressed interest rates in the first
place so one of my heroes in the world
of finance is Jim grant and he's always
said at best you can talk about Alan
Greenspan not not imposing margin
requirements in 1996 when he said the
words irrational exuberance recognizing
we had a stock market bubble he could
have done something about it then he
decided not to alan greenspan again was
informed in 2003 people are getting home
loans who shouldn't be the subprime
mortgage things going to blow up he
could have made mortgage requirements
more stringent lending standards more
stringent he chose not to so jim grant
has always said that the Fed is both
arsonist and firefighter and that is
that is exactly the same exact case
today so you break the Federal Reserve
Act you annihilate Fed independence so
that you can come to rest to the rescue
of the corporate bond market that
wouldn't need rescuing had it not been
for Fed policy this is an old strategy
Awards it's a Hegelian dialectic you
know this is the Hegel philosopher would
talk about create the problem you know
blame it on somebody else then be the
one that comes and offers solution
you'll be the hero oh my gosh thank you
so much for coming and saving us but
you're the one that originally it's very
deceptive now the question you said if
that's the case Trump broke the Fed was
that intentional or accidental that's
the real question well I will say that
the disk I will say that Wall Street was
that you you knew the Wall Street had
its pacifier taken away and there was
minded huge whining among the babies on
Wall Street saying we've got a problem
here in the corporate debt market we've
got a meltdown we might have systemic
risk which is risk you can't contain
which is risk that the Federal Reserve
could not do anything about and we've
got to come up with a solution for this
right now
so you might could say that the need was
there I think a lot of people who would
be
otherwise known as capitalists would
disagree with you and they would say if
they borrowed too much and they couldn't
afford to service their debt then let
them go out of business so I think that
you will be told that the need was there
but I think that's a red herring so so
let's talk about my friends who are the
capitalists that will say if you borrow
too much that let them go out of
business do you have a problem with that
because the way you said it it seemed
like you do have a problem with that no
I'm saying that Wall Street has a
problem with that Wall Street has a
problem with allowing the
too-big-to-fail companies to go out of
business of course they do
ok I'm good I'm fine with that I totally
we're on the same page sir because they
get to do deals regardless a hundred
percent but if you take half you know
they they don't want all their corporate
clients to go away these big investment
banks I want them to stay in business by
being bailed out but then here's the
problem so what kind of a habit are you
teaching if it's the constant bailouts
if I know my dad's gonna bail me out
every time I go do some stupid he's
gonna come and paid $1,000 bail and I'm
gonna get go home as ok I don't worry
about it just don't do it again man
what's wrong with you and I don't want
to do it again and he's gonna bail me
out what the hell am i learning what
lesson am i learning if you're not I
mean if you look at the cash flow of a
major American Airlines ninety six
percent of it went into share buybacks
and we've just wholesale bailed him out
ninety six percent went into the
buybacks but right now with the 2.2
trillion wasn't there closet they can't
do any buybacks F if they took any money
that was part of the discussion that
would have that was part of the
discussion we will wait and see there's
also part of the discussion about not
laying people off until a certain date
and time and not paying executives more
than some exorbitant amount who holds
the federal like you know the whole
thing with the odd odd odd it never took
place who holds them accountable I mean
we had jeb Hensarling he was in Congress
at the time he left there's very little
appetite during crises to hold the Fed
accountable this won't come until after
we're past this and the people realize
what's been done but right now Congress
needs to fed badly they need the Fed to
keep the stock market up they need the
Fed to keep these companies in business
they need these companies to keep their
employees but they can't address the
entire problem and now
the great debate is whether or not the
feds going to come in and cross the
final Rubicon what I'm writing about
this week asks one simple question will
the Federal Reserve buy junk bonds doing
something that no central bank in the
world has done will they go that far
will they bail out companies that are
completely insolvent it's another form
of quantitative easing bill well it's a
form of quantitative easing but in
theory even under extraordinary
circumstances you're not supposed to
bail out an insolvent institution I give
you Lehman Brothers that was what Ben
Bernanke went on national television and
explained they were insolvent therefore
we couldn't bail them out okay he was
solvent therefore the next day we did
bail it out how many laws are being
broken right now I you know what I'm
saying I'm saying this I'm not an
attorney but I've lost count okay so oh
my gosh you know the longest time you
know Milton Freeman one of his hiccups
was that he had a challenge with another
economist was the fact that he felt you
can allow capitalism do its part without
any laws and it later on he came back
and says no if there's one thing we
definitely need we need laws maybe we
don't need a lot of lawyers but we
definitely need lawyers because China I
think back in 2004 they had only a four
in 1994 thing they only had four law
schools and only 2,000 lawyers in China
back in 1994 so there wasn't a lot of
laws okay
it doesn't seem like a lot of them it
was reasoning there rivers yeah and they
were poisoning their rivers of course
and now going back to this when we're
talking about the whole Federal Reserve
to go a little bit deeper into it what
have they ever gotten right because if
you look at internet tech boom late 90s
you oh my gosh you know look how many
billionaires that was going up as some
people's going up you know the mortgage
oh look at this stuff this is just
amazing stuff interest rates you know
this is great don't worry about it it's
gonna be alright Bernanke you think what
have they ever gotten right so there are
two people who are my heroes William
McChesney Martin he went through
multiple administration's was famously
thrown up against a wall by LBJ and
refused to back down to one President
after another
probably
the most independent Federal Reserve
Chairman of all time he was the one who
famously said it is the feds duty to
pull to take away that punch bowl in the
middle of the party in a congressional
testimony and then you had great big
Paul Volcker who defied defied Reagan
mutiny on his own board and was tossed
out on his ass and replaced by Alan
Greenspan and since then basically
whatever investors have wanted investors
have gotten and since then the
inequality divide in America has gaped
out and so I guess since Paul Volcker
not much has gone right at the Federal
Reserve and you've had two independent
chairman in its history to how scary is
it to go against the Fed if somebody's
running for something and you're being
too vocal about it you know ki mean Ron
Paul tried to do it all say I think Ron
Paul he also had another book he wrote
that had to do with the feds right I
think yet I don't know what the title
was but he was also talking about
something with the feds and he got a lot
of pushback and he had a lot of
independence that came out you know
libertarians and independents were all
for him to kind of get him going but
though he can create all the momentum
down to to the end can you really go to
the top and go against that system a lot
of enemies I and I know I've met I've
met Ron but I was never the opinion that
we should have ended the Fed I mean
we're closer to being in Banana Republic
than we ever have been but if you if you
contemplate what China has done with our
intellectual property and then you
extrapolate that type of espionage and
trickery into what they would do if our
financial system was unprotected good
lord
they would take over the economy by
force so I've never been in the opinion
that we should have no Federal Reserve
I've just been under the opinion that if
you can't have a way McChesney Martin E
or a Paul Volcker running it then you
should they should be fired and that
they should be
they should be forced to be independent
it's actually in the Federal Reserve Act
that you are supposed to have a Federal
Reserve Board that is from individuals
who are from a diversity of industries
and geographies you're not just a packet
full of a bunch of PhD academics who've
never had to have a payroll in their
life and only have theoretical models
that they put in place and say I know we
should take interest rates to zero and
see how much that screw savers because
they have pensions for life because
their academics why do you have a
problem with that
why do you because why do you have a
problem with the you know the whole 17
out of the 17 I think you said 10 are
PhD to our lawyers you know what's the
biggest challenge there do you think
we'd have better Fed policy after a
question back back you and be Socratic
do you think we would have better Fed
policy if the people making Fed policy
understood what it was to be on the
receiving end of it you don't have to
sell me on that I'm asking why why is
this continuously happening because for
me you can also make the argument if you
go in there to say how could you be the
commander-in-chief of America and you've
never served the military that's kind of
tough for me I mean we don't have from
each end was the last time we had a
president that served in a military it's
right it's been a long time that's how
could you be too commander in chief if
you've never served the military you
have to know what sacrifice means so
would sacrifice lives of others which
one are you more comfortable with I'm
I'm I look I'm a huge patriot my my my
my boy I go to a military academy I mean
you're I see exactly where you're going
and and again I think that the Federal
Reserve Act was written in good faith
and that we should have pension fund
managers prior successful pension fund
managers and there are a few state of
Indiana the state of Utah they're
actually properly met despite interest
rates being at the zero bound and too
low they're not taking excess risk with
grandma's pension there are joke you
CEOs who've not spent all of the money
on share buybacks despite the temptation
being there and Federal Reserve policies
saying don't invest in the future you're
gonna make a lot a lot bigger bonus and
your stock price is going to go a lot
higher if you buy back your shares
instead and by the way money's free bar
at will and do so but you need to have
people who understand the consequences
of Federal Reserve policy making Federal
Reserve policy and Jay Powell was
actually a kind of a good candidate for
that and he's buckled completely under
the pressure it's funny you say that you
know yesterday we had a meeting with my
cf1 our board was asking me so when are
we applying to get the money from the
stimulus because we can apply for it and
I'm sitting there and I'm saying how
much is it gonna be they give me the
number what's the buy back what does it
look like I'm like you know what we
don't really need it why why we apply
for it let somebody else they get it
that needed we decided to kind of get
our finances in order to not have to
worry about a time like this I don't
have to go and apply for getting the
five or ten million dollar check they're
gonna send I had to okay I'm gonna give
it to somebody else not me I don't need
to be bailed out for it but I just think
this approach we're taking a loan for a
loan for a loan for a loan for a loan I
mean when does it ever end so the
argument then becomes about the taxpayer
who's pissed off and saying let me get
this straight you can constantly bail
yourself out and you can constantly go
print money with this quantitative
easing why the hell do I have to pay
taxes why do I pay taxes if you can you
know no this goes to your argument over
the socialism but why do I pay taxes
that's slightly different than the
concept of socialism because socialism
is to give me stuff right but why do I
pay taxes that's right for my big 40th
birthday lunch there were at the time
that I had lunch with Richard Fisher who
was my boss there were riots in the
streets of Athens and we ended that
lunch with me saying what your greatest
concern and his answer was I worried
that fed policy is going to eventually
land us in the same spot as where Greece
finds itself back then with riots in the
streets now take my example of the state
of Illinois you're you're a Chicagoan
your 401k has been decimated because
you're one of millions of Americans
who've been told to keep your money in
the stock market no matter what and
there's there's there's no other school
of thought you've got countless
investment advisers all giving the
identically same advice to all of them
so your joke you 401k holder
and you're pissed off and you've lost a
good chunk of your savings and you know
you're gonna have to tack at least
another decade onto your work life to
make up for what you've lost now the
city of Chicago has just bailed out its
pension again so you're told that your
property taxes and your state income
taxes are gonna have to rise to pay for
it let's just say Social Security and
Medicare run out of money so you're also
told by the great people in Washington
that your federal taxes are gonna have
to go up as well so you're bailing out
the pensioners you're bailing out the
federal government you're bailing out
corrupt state politicians and unions who
knows them who have given way too much
more than they could ever afford to pay
for and your next-door neighbor's a
fireman who's living great and he's set
for life these are the seeds of social
unrest in this country you can only
drive so big of a wedge between the
haves and the have-nots especially when
you're getting out the middle class in
the process if you make very very little
in America today and I'm talking about
today 25% of Americans who qualify for
unemployment insurance are going to make
more money in the second quarter than
they would if they had not lost their
job that's how big unemployment that's
how big the stimulus bill is by taxing
that one more time say that one more
time so the stimulus bill tacks on six
hundred dollars for every American what
they get paid by collecting unemployment
insurance so 25 percent of Americans who
are going to be out of the workforce
okay are going to make more in the
second quarter April May and June than
they would have had they kept their job
so if you make very little in America
today you're gonna get through this if
you're worth a ton of money you'd long
since gone to cash
let's get honest if you're part of that
1% if you're in the middle you're
screwed and
pissed and you're a taxpayer and that's
why I say this could be such a ground
roots source that this this could be a
generational change that brings about
I'm looking at Abraham Lincoln I'm
inspired that brings about a genuine
change in how we approach our leadership
in America and I'm all for it I'm not
all for American families hurting at all
don't get me wrong but we have gone
through multiple iterations of gutting
out our middle class you can't do that
for too long you lose loyalty you can't
I mean you want me to pay taxes I don't
know prom paying taxes but I mean do
something with the money I'm giving you
and actually deliver on your promises
instead of taking what if you don't want
to do universal basic income and impose
socialism what if you actually hold dear
to your american ideals and you want to
work hard for a living then you're even
more pissed off well that's the
community I'm talking about I'm not
talking about the community of send me
free money I'm not talking about free
money I'm talking about hey instead of
talking about thousand dollars universal
income andrew yang policy that became a
hit in the democratic presidential
campaign that was going on I'm talking
about rather than that what about if you
do something that is not paying taxes
for a certain amount what for I mean I'm
not anyways that's a whole different
conversation I don't want to know in
part but they're in mind to your point
before you move on the Federal Reserve
monetizing the US debt is what enables
all of this Oh preciate their role I and
I understand that but also at the same
time I want to I want to make sure that
if I am getting to work and I'm working
then I'm the middle guy not the middle
or the top I'm talking the person in the
middle the middle person is like I can't
wait to get these checks gonna be great
Lots gonna be better than what I was
getting paid to twenty five percent
making less than fifteen bucks an hour
yep so you know how that numbers gonna
work out the guys at the top they're
like listen I'm gonna be fine
everything's gonna be cheap I'm gonna
buy stuff on sale right now I'm gonna
make more money today than ever before
those guys are fine the middle guy
that's doing his part her part that's
the person that I can understand why
they're pissed off why they would want
to see some kind of reforms taking place
by the way who
the Federal Reserve Horta main
shareholders right now Donald Trump but
that's post legislation that's
decision-maker then I guess I'm talking
about okay Sachs I'm talking about there
is an answer to this question there is
truly an answered this question and boy
I'll be waiting for the hate mail when I
worked at the Dallas Federal Reserve my
email address ended in dot o-r-g there
are there are banks that own the twelve
District Federal Reserve banks are owned
by banks in the sense that they Kate
they get paid a dividend from what the
district banks make up 6% and then
whatever money the bank has if it's a
district bank whether it be San
Francisco or Dallas or Atlanta then they
have to pay the operating costs to
operate an individual district bank and
after that every single penny that is
remaining is remitted to the US Treasury
that is why my email address ended in
dot o-r-g not dot c om because we were a
quasi private public enterprise J
Powell's email address ends in dot govt
the Federal Reserve Board in Washington
DC is a bonafide formal federal agency
that is not owned by the banks there's a
gray area there's a gray area and this
is this is up for everybody in tin hats
here you go
let's plow it down the middle the
government employees have permanent
votes on the Federal Open Market
Committee the district bank presidents
rotate in every few years they do not
have a permanent vote on the Federal
Open Market Committee so they have less
power the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York however the president of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York is also
the vice chairman of the Federal Open
Market Committee he has a permanent vote
the only one of the districts who has a
permanent vote on the Federal Open
Market Committee and has the quasi
public private ownership which brings in
the banks that sit on the board that
you're getting to so there is a gray
area there and the New York Fed does
have extraordin
power compared to any other district and
that power over the years and prior to
the crisis was corrupted which is
documented and the reforms that should
have been made subsequent to the crisis
have not been and if you want to get
angry about something get anger about
that but understand that the bulk of the
power seat is a government agency or the
Treasury would not have been able to
step in like it has this is like we need
a drink right now so I was going to say
that I can read you need something
stronger than a memo so let me say that
much okay so how much do you if you're
an economist and you do this full-time
you've been in it for a while this is
your career by the way I know I'm in
finance you know I'm just sure and you
said something about you start out in
finance I think you worked in hedge fund
at one point I think you did I worked
with hedge funds I worked at attrition
traditional investment bank I watched
what investment banks issued from the
inside out both sides yeah I start off
with Morgan sandy Dean Witter a day
before 9/11 that's kind of how my career
got started you know in Glendale
California was suppose to go to New York
and indeed I was short the S&P 500 on
9/11 you you what I was i I had I
personally had a short position in the
stock market prior oh well I felt that
the market was very much overvalued ok
and was still going to come down so and
my clients were very defensively
postured also for that very same reason
going into 9/11 my birthday was on 9 17
the day the stock market reopened and I
closed out my position as quickly as I
possibly could because I felt like I had
the blood of Americans on my hands for
having profited from it small story
strange but true what timing talk about
oh my gosh craziness right so how much
do you read into these conspiracy
theories that you hear about with the
feds with the creature of Jekyll Island
NSF how much to go how deep do you have
you ever read the book or no yeah you
have to read the book world the six
names they're owned a quarter of the
wealth of the world etc etc on Woodrow
Wilson saying what he said I get it I
get it I get it I get it and back in
1907 when we had a financial crisis and
when JP Morgan brought all of the
biggest bankers together in his parlor
and said I'm not gonna be alive forever
we're no longer an emerging economy we
are advancing to become a developed
economy and like our developed economy
peers we'd need a central bank because I
can't keep bringing you all together to
bailout the financial system every time
there's a crisis so that was the genesis
of the need for a central bank was JP
Morgan saying I'm going to die one day
we need independent central bank like
the Bank of England we've evolved as an
economy we need a central bank because
of how the Federal Reserve was born and
when it was born much more importantly
it was born headed into a war that
exacerbated and over-indebted a globally
over-indebted situation and brought
about hyperinflation in Germany and
another excuse me a Great Depression in
between that took the world down with it
and brought about a war I want you to
think about that and where we are today
but because of the backdrop with which
the Federer in to being and the fact
that it had to go into DEFCON one almost
immediately means that the original
people who conceived it were bankers and
had extraordinary powers since then the
Federal Reserve has become a very boring
boring boring place are there conflicts
of interest at the New York Fed do big
banks have more say than they should in
terms of being regulated yes they do
without a doubt unquestionably but the
Federal Reserve of today is bad for
America which is my subtitle because the
people who are in charge of the Federal
Reserve don't have Americans best
interest at heart
they've put us in a precarious position
financially such that if there was ever
an economic shock their policies will
have left us so much weaker than we need
it to be otherwise and that's a hell of
a lot worse than any conspiracy
theorists up in the middle of the night
dreaming about a Rothschild running the
world because a lot more people are
gonna get hurt because you've had
academics running one of the most
powerful institutions in the world how
deep have you studied this how deep have
you gone and who have you had these
conversations with for you to get a
hundred percent certain to know that
there is none of this Rothschild on you
that kind of stuff well you just kind of
haven't put a lot of time I just well I
just was kind of working there for nine
years and spend a lot of time the New
York Fed and I saw with my own eyes what
was happening I know that but I'm
talking inception how it got started I'm
talking that stand that part of it I
mean that part of it again so if for
everybody who can hear me read the Lords
of Finance read one book if you don't
read any other book read the Lords of
finance and and it starts off kind of in
1913 1914 and it takes you through some
of the biggest mistakes that were made
at the Fed and other people running the
world at the time in Germany for example
and at the Bank of England and it and at
the Bach de France it walks you through
it and that is a much more valid history
if you will then the creature of Jekyll
Island which brings a lot of history to
the fore but doesn't apply to the world
we live in today
but if you want to understand how the
Federal Reserve evolved to become this
powerhouse that it is read a different
book do yourself a favor read the Lords
of Finance and then you won't ever sleep
at night again because of the parallels
that it draws between now and then fair
enough okay a couple things just just
the real cool questions here since we've
covered a lot of different things
already crypto currency or any opinions
on crypto currency is it you know you
have a whole big camp right now saying
this is exactly why we know we were
gonna go to crypto currency this is the
time to buy
you know XRP Ripoll what's your opinions
on crypto currencies so I think crypto
currency is a
modern-day reflection of the disgust
that we have in a lack of discipline and
monetary policymaking
it is this generations gold and my issue
with it is that it is much more
convertible as opposed to physical gold
cryptocurrency is much more adaptable on
a sovereign level so you've already had
the Bank of England you certainly had
Venezuela Russia and China they were at
the forefront of coming out and saying
we're going to have sovereign
cryptocurrency said that we can monitor
what everybody buys in our societies
it's going to be yet another instrument
that we have on top of facial
recognition but you've also had that
United States also step in and say yes
there will be a federal cryptocurrency
at some point so as long as you have
that ability to make it go from
something that is in the private realm
to being something that is sovereign I
think that that takes away its
convertibility to gold if you will so
prou yes put a couple jobs in there or
I'm very neutral on are you a Ewing but
are you and I own gold but I do not know
you are Goble not cryptocurrency let's
talk about gold what's your opinions
today on gold so gold surprised a lot of
people because it got hit initially when
financial markets had had their initial
setback and that I would like to clarify
was more a function of margin calls you
come out recently
I'm very recent one from fifty-three
kilo down to 47 K 46 KS yes okay now
it's coming back as the printing presses
worldwide get revved up and people are
like they're not gonna stop they're
already talking about the second that
they're the four stimulus bill so
they're just going to print to Kingdom
Come and so's the rest of the world and
which country can come rollout with the
biggest stimulus package so now you're
seeing gold play its traditional role of
the protector of the hard asset value a
store of value now you're seeing gold
come out and rise and I would suspect
that that should continue as they try
and piss all over the US dollar by
printing to kingdom come
you you're forcing it grow
for what foreseeable future like five
years ten years fifteen years because if
you go to the last 30 years the last 30
years if you put it against Dow Jones
Dow Jones crushed gold and last 30 years
in the last 15 years it's beaten Dow
Jones and SMP 500 so are you talking 10
20 years well I won't say 10 to 10 to 20
years because my crystal ball is not
that good time but I would certainly say
if you're talking about the next 5 years
or so I would certainly think that that
was going to be the case because
everybody's of the opinion that the
stock market's going to come roaring
back and that the Fed is gonna be able
to save the day I'm not so sure which
means that if I'm not so sure and we're
gonna need more stimulus than gold is
going to be more attractive as a factor
of time another crazy conspiracy theory
althought you see what you think about
it how much of this do you think it's
coronavirus and you know whatever's
going on with US and China how much it
is you think is China saying you know
what screw you u.s. you're playing this
hardball with me I'm gonna come and bull
you in a whole different way that you
won't even pay attention to it how much
how much credibility do you give to that
5% 1% I'm not going to answer that
question but I am going to answer the
question in a different way because I'm
Christian at heart and I like to think
that nobody would want to kill people I
will say this much and if you're
listening write it down in late November
word had already gotten off of the
mainland that there was a virus in Wuhan
on January the 15th the US trade bill
was signed phase 1 December the 15th
excuse me December the 15th I had a
whole month off December the 15th six
weeks later the trade truce was signed
with an out clause a very clever out
clause that the Chinese made sure was in
there that said if there was any kind of
act of God
pandemic then they didn't have to make
good on what they had committed to buy
from the United States within days they
announced the first coronavirus so did
the Chinese know damn well that this
thing was running around the world for
six weeks before they shut down Wuhan
yes they did is that criminal yes it is
does it deserve to go in front of a
world Tribune oh yes it does
because we know that it was the
unfettered travel that made this thing a
global phenomena it was impossible to
contain six weeks they knew but they
wanted that out clause and then they
underreported what happened in Wuhan
which a toddler could tell you based on
what happened in Italy based on what's
happened in Germany and in France and
now in the UK with Boris Johnson in the
ICU
there's no way in a city the size of New
York 11 million people that there were
so few cases it's impossible with
similar density to New York so the World
Health Organization should be held
accountable for not holding China
accountable to providing good valid data
so that the rest of the world could
prepare for fewer people to die and
that's what you're talking about to me
these are equivalents to acts of war on
the part of China and then equally
whether you're talking about NPR or Fox
News most major media outlets on both
sides of the aisle came out and
reassured the United States that it was
just the flu within 24 hours of South
Korea's first case being reported the
United States first case was reported
and what we did was dither
we sat on it for six weeks and tried to
reassure the public that nothing was
happening somebody should be held
accountable for that because somebody in
the United States intelligence community
has to have known what was truly going
on in Wuhan we don't have a CIA for
nothing and yet we told Americans for
six weeks while South Korea was testing
everybody and shutting the country down
but it was just going to be the flu so
there are a lot of responsible bodies
right now that have taken us to the
point where we're at inside the country
and in China and they need to be held
accountable so you don't even have to
get on the discussion as to whether or
not that was this was a manufactured
virus and set upon the world you don't
even have to go that far
if we find that in future investigations
then that needs to be prosecuted but if
we just ascertain what is known and a
known hushed up secret that the Chinese
knew for six weeks about the virus
before saying anything on the global
stage
to get a trade ill find somebody needs
to look into that because countless
lives have been lost as a result the
damages are in the tens of trillion
dollars we're not talking about small
here if that's the case no we're not and
we're talking about people losing their
family members and we're talking about
trillions of we're talking about
suicides in the future we're talking
about economic hardship all of this
could have been mitigated had China been
honest and had the World Health
Organization made China accountable
because at first they said it's not it's
not anything to worry about one who
first came I wouldn't a wh o first came
out and said we don't need to stop every
let me ask you who do you who do you
trust Elysee you I ran Russia or China
China China's got more economic power
because of that or because they don't
have a free press and because we can't
really know what the hell is going on
over there well that's just a kicker but
you don't really know what's going on in
Iran either you had global satellite
images in Iran showing mass graves Iran
under report it the same and you can't
tell me that in the cold of winter that
Russia has as many cases is its
reporting but at last check
China seventeen percent of global GDP
they can throw more money around than
anybody else and you just mentioned two
of their allies by the way so that's why
I asked it away I did and the largest
contiguous land border on the planet by
the way between Russia and China I worry
about these things because I have four
children but but China right now can
throw around the most because they've
got the biggest pocketbook it's gonna be
a very interesting what happens the next
six 12 18 months very because if China
comes out guilty for having done
something the trade relationships that
happens with that and travel do you let
anybody come in
it's it's the consequences could be do
you do you do any due diligence and
looking at 5g or not at all you 5g is
not something that you have strong
opinions on my opinions on 5g are so
strong that I would never let myself or
anybody that I know buy a Volvo connect
those dots because I don't want China
listening to me while I Drive a car I
trust China when it comes to 5g as much
as I would trust buying a Volvo owned by
China so I think it is a matter of
national security
do you social media a lot a lot way too
much
how about tick-tock my daughter daughter
okay you know the story behind takaka as
well don't okay got it
listen I'll turn it over to your final
thoughts what do you imagine the
families watching right now and they're
kind of listening to this and you've
shared a lot we've covered a lot what
words of reassurance or preparation or
anticipation what could you share with
the rest of us the Great Depression in
America was one of the darkest chapters
in US history
but it also brought out the best in
Americans Hershey Pennsylvania exists
because Hershey himself employed
Americans construction workers who are
out of work to build the city this is a
time that as Americans we can come
together and not talk about helping our
neighbor but help our neighbor truly
give them what they need this is a time
for America to shine and I'm involved in
a fundraiser where we are procuring
masks to get them to frontline workers
and I'm watching people open up whether
it's food to their fellow Americans this
is our finest finest hour and this will
make us stronger for it in the end if we
open our hearts and if we have the
ability our wallets to those in need and
see our way through what's to come I
appreciate you for coming out this has
been incredible
hopefully in the future we'll invite you
back and you'll be willing to come back
and sit I'll talk about different topics
as it's formulating we're gonna put the
link of her book below and also you
mentioned a charity you're part of if
you don't mind sharing that link with us
as well look at that below as well for
you to go find out what she's a part of
extremely insightful I think extremely
fair on the way you give your feedback
and point of view and there was so much
to take away again thank you for coming
out and being against somebody teaming
thank you thank you for what you do
thank you
you asked one economist we brought it
for you this was a very interesting
interview with the angle she took on
federal reserve or her thoughts on China
what she felt about China known six
weeks before and should there be
consequences to China anyways I want to
hear for you comment below if you
haven't yet I have two other videos I
want you to watch one of them is with a
bio warfare and a pandemic expert that
talked about corruption in China if you
have a watch it's like five six minutes
and the other one is since I'm sitting
down one an economist I thought it would
made sense for you to watch the Ray
Dalio
interview we did because a lot of talk
of China was talked about here when we
sat down with them late last year 2019
having said that if you haven't
subscribed to the channel please do so
thanks for watching everybody take care
bye bye
[Music]